## Poetry

Poetry is a dependency management and packaging tool. 
It was created because python doesn't have enough dependency management and packaging tools.

You need to install poetry:
```shell
curl -sSL https://install.python-poetry.org | python3 -
```

It'll install poetry to ~/.local/bin/poetry, you'll need to add it to a $PATH

You'll need to have `pyproject.toml`.

I used `pyproject.toml` generated by IDEA, but `poetry new <name>` also will do.

We can add dependency with 
```shell
poetry add flask
```

It'll add dependency to [pyproject.toml](./pyproject.toml) and create a lock file.
Kinda like pip-tools but with a new format of a lock file.

Inspect a dependency tree with
```shell
poetry show --tree
```

You can install everything (including current project) with:
```shell
poetry install
```

You can run your entrypoints with
```shell
poetry run my-script
```

If you put your source code to `src/<name>` then poetry will figure out that it's your source code.

Run python interpeter in the current venv with `poetry run python`


You can build your project with 
```shell
poetry build
```

It'll create source distribution and wheel distribution in a dict/folder


### Wheels

Wheel distribution is essentially binary distribution that's install-ready by simple copying.
When you do `pip install X` and there's no prebuilt wheel for X, then pip will build a wheel itself.

If you have binary code (think C/C++ extensions), then you'll need to build a wheel for each platform.

Wheel is a zip-archive, which contains all files and some metadata.